OK guys, welcome back! So, we're going to do
a bit of consolidating and tidying up. I've done one sneaky little thing
between videos, which I just moved a few red blocks just to make a
more complete looking Level_02, but you know really want to start being
creative with your levels now. So,
what I want to look at is we have both a Max Hits
variable and an array of Hit Sprites, and I think that's
messy. I don't want both of those things because the
maximum hits is always going to be the number of Hit Sprites plus 1, so why don't we
think about working with an artist. Imagine you're working with
a separate artist. You don't want them to have to think about changing these two
things. So, if they decide they want three stages of hits for a
brick, well maybe give them that free will and take it from
the size of the hit array. so, let's go into our Brick and
just say to ourselves, well we can keep the API
if you like, the application programming interface or the interface um
the same as it was but i.e.
we can continue to use the word maxHits, but
we can infer what that maxHit thing is
from the size of our sprite array.
OK, so it's simply
and we need to do it, by the way, every time that we
hit. It's simply maxHits =... Now, what
does it equal? Well, it's the hitSprites dot you'll see
Length. OK, so if
there are no hitSprites, then what's the
maximum number of hits? Well, it would be a
Length of 0, so maxHits would be 0. Well that's wrong! So,
it needs to be + 1 as we said. Let's look in the Inspector!
Let's look at a prefab, say
a two hit. The size of this array is 1, so the
maxHits is 2. The size of this hit array is 2, so the maxHits is 3. So,
maxHits is always Size +1 or hitSprites.Length
+1. So now we no longer need to publicly
expose maxHits. In fact, does it even need to be at the top?
So, let's start by making it private and then bringing
it down with the rest of the private variables, like so. Now,
just check the scope. If you search for maxHits, you'll
start to see where it appears. Well it appears in the OnCollisionEnter2D method
twice, and it's actually the only place it appears at the moment.
So, if that's the only place we're using maxHits, why don't we
take it down even further and just declare it right here. int maxHits;
= hitSprites.Length + 1; Now, we can get rid of it
in the header. No point of it having the scope of all of these methods if we're only going to use
it in this method. Now sure, you could just say timeHit greater and equal
to hitSprites plus length plus 1, if you want to do that simplification
that's fine. I'm just leaving maxHits in because it's just sort of
self documenting code. So, let's go back to Unity,
and you'll notice now that the Max Hits disappears in the
Inspector and that the number of hits a brick can take is determined only
by how many hit sprites we actually attach. Can you see the
beauty of that, the simplicity of only having that information in one
place? Well, before we get too excited about it let's make sure it works!
So, it's working for the yellow bricks. Let's see if it works for
other bricks. I'm actually going to restart and send it into the top,
if I can get the angle right. There we go! So, 1, 2...
It seems to be, certainly the red bricks are taking too
levels of damage without any problem. I'd better be over on my guard, over on the left here, ready for it to come
out of the hole. OK that's cool! So now, I just want to see that a
green brick works properly. I'm sure it will, because the logic is very
simple. Let's just have a quick look. There's a green
brick being hit once, and at the moment, I don't have a lot of scope
to make the ball bounce in any strange ways. Here you go! Look the red bricks are being hit.
Green brick and this all appears to be
working just fine. Fantastic! Alright, so the next
thing to think about is, what happens if I don't bother with a sprite?
Imagine I accidentally or my designer accidentally didn't attach a sprite
down here or made his array the wrong size. Well, let's
see what happens! Does the program handle it or does it error?
The sprite just disappears! Now, pause the game.
Has it actually gone? Well, let's look at our top row and scroll...
I think we've got a different name for it? Reds! And scroll across...
Ah look, what's going on here? We have a 3 hit brick that is actually
still there, will still collide off it, and
it has a color of red, etc. but it has no
sprite. So, that brick is still there, it's sprite has disappeared,
and what's happened in the script is, when we got down
here and it asked to load the sprite, that sprite of sprite index
0 did not exist, because look we've deleted it, Element 0.
It didn't exist and it hasn't given us any error, or if it has, I didn't see them.
No I didn't see anything. It's just failed to load it all together,
so that's not very gracious failing, as far as I'm concerned.
I don't really like that, so
we need to have a better way of handling the fact that
this sprite doesn't exist, just disappearing and still
having a collider is pretty nasty really.
So, we could go crazy here with guard conditions and lots of things.
I mean the real key is the communication between you and whoever's designing the level,
which includes between you and you, but for a start, let's just do at
least this. Let's just say that if this
exists, if we can find a sprite at that index,
then load the sprite, otherwise,
just leave it how it is. Let's see what behavior that leads to!
I'm just putting it in an if statement. This hitSprites[spriteIndex]; will return
null or false rather, if there is no sprite there.
Now, let's see what happens now! So, remember before
our red brick was disappearing
but staying... I'm just trying to get this up the side here.
Ah wee! OK, now what it's doing now is it's
not loading the single hit sprite. OK that's not ideal and it's weird,
and it's quite obviously weird actually, it's just odd behavior. So,
this is a much better failure path. At least it's not making an invisible brick
that we... There you go! And then the second stage is working! So, that's
much much better! So, I'm going to go back to the 3 hit prefab and
just fix it by putting it's 1 hit sprite back in.
And I'm just going to recap in the code for you what we did. We just put in an if condition
around the sprite loading, to say that if when
we lookup the sprite, that's this current [spriteIndex], we have
nothing, this will return false, and it just doesn't change the sprite.
Much better, much more graceful way for that to fail,
as far as I'm concerned. So, we're in much much better shape
here now. We really can extend this game nicely now, we
can go ahead and build out levels. We could add to our
bricks array here, more stages of decay
for the brick if you wanted to. You don't, no longer need to worry
about whether you've got the
Max Hits set right. One thing that would make sense is, these bricks aren't really
1, 2, 3 hit anymore. That's not really what defines
them. The number of hits is defined by the amount of sprites we've attached.
So, why don't we go ahead and just rename it yellow,
green, and red.
These are the sort of things you need to think about, the naming of these things
OK. Yellow, green, and red. That's fine! OK now, they
don't sit next to each other, and you could complain about that or put it in a
subfolder, but at least if I come along now and say to the red brick, well
actually I want another stage of decay, by sticking in another
sprite, then at least it's not wrong, the name isn't wrong. Of course, the name is
wrong for the color then, so if I change the color I need to change the name.
So naming is actually a more important thing than you can imagine. You may
want to just given these actually kind of silly names, Berty and Johnny
and Katy, but don't infer anything about either the color
or the number of hits. Ah but just think about naming. I'm going to name
my blocks yellow, green, and red, and they're going to have
no hits, no break, no damage, one, you know
they die on the first hit; one hit and two hits
respectively, that's just my choice. So that's all consolidated,
it's all looking pretty good and pretty solid now.
There's just one more thing we need to cover, which is the idea of an unbreakable
block. So, how would we make an unbreakable block? Well,
we're going to need a tag, I think, here; a tag for breakable
blocks would be really handy. If you click on one of your block prefabs
and then go to the Inspector at the top, you'll see tagged
and untagged will probably be selected. Go ahead and Add
Tag and under Element 0 there's
just going to be a single tag called breakable. It's a positive
condition, this block is breakable. Now,
select all of your breakable blocks, in my case red, green, and yellow,
and give them the tag Breakable, like I'm showing
on the screen. Inspector, Tag, Breakable. Tick that
and now they all have the Breakable tag! Great news!
So that can act independently of the color or
the number of hit states they have, and what I want
to do now is go ahead and make an unbreakable block, looking like
the paddle. So, you can try this as a quick challenge. Clone the yellow
block from Edit and Duplicate, set
its color to white, and then just simply set it as unbreakable,
i.e. remove the Breakable tag. Go ahead and do that now.
OK, so I'm duplicating the yellow and
I'm going to call it invincible.
There it is! I'm going to set the color to white, if my color picker
will behave. OK, fine
and I'm then going to remove the Breakable tag
Invincible. Cool! So now we have our blocks
tagged as breakable or not. So, pop back into your
brick script really quickly, and we are going to just
decide whether or not a block is breakable up
here. OnCollisionEnter2D, what I want to do
is I want to make this a clearer method by separating out a new thing
that says HandleHits
and it says method, and I'm just going to put all the code
that we've currently got OnCollisionEnter2D into here
and call it from OnCollisionEnter2D. You'll see
why I'm doing that in a minute. It simplifies OnCollisionEnter2D and now I can come
along and say, well there's a boolean a yes or no and it's called
isBreakable, and it = to some condition
which I'm going to put in brackets. And the condition is that
(this, which is this current block, .tag ==
because it's a comparison "Breakable"); So,
the block is breakable if the tag says it's breakable, and then, if
(isBreakable) then
you handle the hits for now, otherwise
you don't, simple as that. So, you only handle the hits if it's
breakable. OK, so that's the code we want
to change to. Separating out this method just makes it all read easier.
Let's go back to Unity, put an unbreakable block in
the scene quickly, the Invincible block somewhere in the scene, and let's just test.
So, Invincible should just do nothing, and the rest of the blocks
act as normal. Perfect! So
congratulations, you've learned a huge amount about a block's breakability,
etc. and we have consolidated where we are
and we are ready to move on. So, pat yourself on the back and
see you soon!